ings, and rival alliances led to a continental war.

I
n the later 1800s, many people in Europe joined
groups to promote peace. They met several
times between 1843 and 1907 to urge their cause.
While this movement for peace was building, so
were other developments. These other factors
would soon plunge Europe into war.
One of those factors was nationalism—the deep
feeling of attachment to one’s own nation. This
force helped unify the people of a country. It also
helped promote competition between countries. By
1900, six nations were rivals for power in Europe.
These nations, called the Great Powers, were
Germany, Austria-Hungary, Great Britain, Russia,
Italy, and France. They competed economically,
and they competed for neighboring land.
Imperialism was another force that helped lead
to war. France and Germany, each seeking control
of parts of Africa, almost came to war twice in the
early 1900s. Such competition bred mistrust.
The third factor leading to war was a growing
arms race. Each country in Europe—except Great
Britain—built a large army. Generals in each country
made complex plans to be able to mobilize their
armies or rush troops to battle as quickly as possible.
Growing rivalry led the nations to make alliances
with one another. Fearing that France would want
revenge for its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War,
Otto von Bismarck set out to isolate France. In

1879, he formed a Triple Alliance with Austria-
Hungary and Italy, and a treaty with Russia.

However, when Wilhelm II became kaiser, or
emperor, of Germany, he did not want to share
power. He forced Bismarck out and followed his
own policy. He let the agreement with Russia
expire, and Russia quickly allied itself with France.
This alliance meant that Germany would have to
fight enemies on east and west borders if there were
a war with either country. Wilhelm II then moved to
make the German navy larger. Britain grew alarmed

and began to build more ships of its own. It made a
Triple Entente alliance with France and Russia. The
six Great Powers had now formed two camps:
Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy against Britain,
France, and Russia.
Meanwhile, trouble was brewing in the Balkans,
in southeastern Europe. The Ottoman Empire,
which controlled this area, was breaking apart.
Both Austria-Hungary and Russia wanted some of
this land. The kingdom of Serbia, which was in this
region, wanted to bring other Slavic peoples who
lived in the Balkans under its control. In 1908,
Austria-Hungary seized Bosnia and Herzegovina.
These lands had Slavic peoples, and the Serbs were

angered. However, their Russian allies were unwill-
ing to support them, and they backed down.

By 1914, the situation was different. Serbia had
gained land in other parts of the region and felt
strong. Austria worried that Serbia might interfere
with its control of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Amid
these tensions, a shot rang out. In June 1914, a
Serbian shot and killed the heir to the throne of
Austria-Hungary. Austria-Hungary declared war on
Serbia, Russia came to Serbia’s defense, and soon
most of Europe was at war.
Europe Plunges into War
KEY IDEA One European nation after another was
drawn into a large and industrialized war that resulted in
many casualties.
The system of alliances turned the war between
Austria-Hungary and Serbia into a wider war.
Russia moved against Austria-Hungary. Figuring
that Germany would support Austria-Hungary,
Russia moved troops against Germany as well.
Germany declared war on Russia. Soon after, it also
declared war on France, Russia’s ally.
Germany had a plan for winning the war on two
fronts. It called for a rapid push through France, a
quick defeat of that nation, and a turn to face Russia
in the east. To capture France quickly, Germany

CHAPTER
29

1

2

0113-wh10a-CIB-07 11/13/2003 2:04 PM Page 113

© McDougal Littell Inc. All rights reserved.

114 Unit 7, Chapter 29

moved through Belgium, which was a neutral coun-
try. Britain was outraged by this and declared war

on Germany. France, Britain, and Russia were later
joined by Italy, which broke from Germany and
Austria-Hungary. They were called the Allies.
Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire joined Germany
and Austria-Hungary. They were called the Central
Powers.
After the German army moved almost to Paris,
French defenses strengthened and stopped them in
September 1914. Both sides became bogged down
in a bloody conflict. Soldiers dug deep trenches into
the ground, protecting themselves with barbed wire
and machine guns. Inside the trenches, they lived in
mud, suffered the lack of food, and were killed or
wounded by exploding bombs. Attacks were even
worse. Generals still hoped to win ground with
massed attacks of huge armies. But, when soldiers
left the trenches to storm enemy lines, they faced
powerful weapons. Machine guns, tanks, poison gas,
and larger pieces of artillery killed hundreds of
thousands of soldiers. This was the war in France,
which was called the Western Front.
The war on the Eastern Front showed more
movement at first—but it was equally destructive.
Russian armies attacked both Germany and
Austria-Hungary. After some early success, they
were driven back in both places. One reason was
that Russia did not have a fully industrial economy.
It could not keep troops supplied. Still, Russia had
a huge population and could send millions to war.
The large Russian army provided a constant threat
to Germany, preventing it from putting its full
resources against the allies in the west.
A Global Conflict
KEY IDEA World War I spread to several continents and
used the full resources of many governments.
The war moved into Southwest Asia when the
Allies hoped to take a part of the Ottoman
Empire called the Dardanelles. That would allow
them to capture Constantinople—the Ottoman
capital—and send supplies to Russia through the
Black Sea. The attack failed with great loss of life.
In another thrust at that empire, a British officer
named T. E. Lawrence helped lead an Arab revolt
against Ottoman rule. As a result, the Allies were
able to capture several important cities in
Southwest Asia.

Japan took German colonies in China and the
Pacific Ocean. The Allies also captured three of the
four German colonies in Africa. People in the Allies’
colonies joined in the war effort. Some worked for
the Allied cause. Others fought in the armies.
The British had used their strong navy to block
all supplies from reaching Germany. In response,
the Germans increased their submarine attacks on
ships that brought food and supplies to the Allies.
U.S. President Woodrow Wilson had protested this
policy before, and did so again. When American
ships were sunk, the American people grew angry.
Then the British intercepted a secret message from
Germany to Mexico. It offered to help Mexico
regain land lost to the United States in the 1840s if
Mexico allied itself with Germany. This and the
submarine attacks turned many Americans against
Germany. In April 1917, Congress declared war on
Germany.
By that year, the war had had a terrible impact,
killing millions and radically changing the lives of
millions more—people at home as well as soldiers.
This “Great War,” as it was called, was a total war.
It demanded all the resources of the countries that
fought it. Governments took control of factories,
telling them what to produce and how much of it to
make. Governments rationed food and other goods,
limiting how much people could buy and hold.
That way they were sure to provide needed supplies
to the armies in the field. They used propaganda to
generate support for the war. They also took steps
to put down any dissent against the war.
With so many men in the field, women played a
growing role in the economies of the countries at
war. They worked in factories, offices, and shops.
They built planes and tanks, grew food and made
clothing. These changes had an impact on people’s
attitudes toward what kind of work women could do.
In 1917, the United States entered the war, and
Russia left it. Suffering during the war chipped
away at the Russian people’s support for the czar.
In March, he stepped down. The new government
hoped to continue fighting the war, but the Russian
armies refused. Just months later, a new revolution
struck. Communists seized Russia’s government.
They quickly made a treaty with Germany, giving
up huge amounts of land in return for peace. In
March 1918, Germany tried one final attack. Once
again, the German army nearly reached Paris. The
soldiers were tired, and supplies were short, though.
Name The Great War continued

3
0114-wh10a-CIB-07 11/13/2003 2:04 PM Page 114

The Great War 115

© McDougal Littell Inc. All rights reserved.
The Allies—now with fresh American troops—
drove the Germans back.
Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire surrendered.
In October, a revolution toppled the emperor of
Austria-Hungary. In November, Kaiser Wilhelm II

was forced to step down in Germany. The new gov-
ernment agreed to stop fighting, and on November

11, 1918, Europe was finally at peace.
The war had made a great and terrible mark on
the world. About 8.5 million soldiers had died and
another 21 million had been wounded. Countless
civilians had suffered as well. The economies of the
warring nations had suffered serious damage, too.
Farms were destroyed and factories ruined. One
estimate said the war had caused $338 billion in
damage.
Along with this death and destruction, the war
had an emotional cost. People felt disillusioned

since all the suffering did not seem to have a pur-
pose. The art and literature of the years after the

war reflected a new sense of hopelessness in people.
A Flawed Peace
KEY IDEA After winning the war, the Allies dictated a
harsh peace that left many nations feeling betrayed.
Many nations sent delegates to peace talks in
Paris. The main leaders were Woodrow
Wilson of the United States, Georges Clemenceau
of France, and David Lloyd George of Britain.
Germany and its allies and Russia were not present.
Wilson pushed for his peace plan called the
Fourteen Points. He wanted to end secret treaties
and alliances and give people the right to form
their own nation. He also hoped to set up a world
organization that could police the actions of nations
and prevent future wars.
Britain and especially France had different views.
They had suffered greatly in the war and wanted to
punish Germany. After long debates, the leaders
finally agreed on a peace settlement called the
Treaty of Versailles.
The treaty called for a League of Nations—the
world organization that Wilson wanted. It would
include 32 nations, with the United States, Britain,
France, Japan, and Italy making up the leadership.
Germany and Russia were left out of the League.
The treaty took away German land in Europe and
took away its colonies. Limits were placed on the
size of Germany’s armed forces. Finally, Germany

was given complete blame for the war, which
meant it would have to make payments to the Allies
for the damage caused.
Germany’s former colonies were given to the
Allies to govern until they decided which were ready
for independence. Poland, Czechoslovakia, and
Yugoslavia were all declared independent. Finland,
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—once part of
Russia—were made independent nations as well.
The Ottoman Empire was broken up. The Ottomans
kept control only of Turkey.
The treaty never made a lasting peace. This was
in part because the United States Senate never
approved either the treaty or joining the League of
Nations. Also, Germans bitterly resented the treaty,
which placed all the blame for the war on them.
Colonial peoples in Africa and Asia had hoped that
they could win their independence. They were angry
when the treaty did not allow for that. Japan and
Italy were also upset with the treaty. They had both
joined the war in hopes of winning more land and
were disappointed by getting few territorial gains.